+++
title = "stratisd 2.0.0 Release Notes"
date = 2019-11-01
weight = 5
template = "page.html"
render = true
+++

Friday November 1, 2019

This release makes the D-Bus API more robust, reliable, and predictable. There
are several significant changes:

* The set of D-Bus properties has been reduced to a core set of fundamental
and stable properties. Other filesystem, pool, or block devices properties are
now obtainable via methods in the `FetchProperties` interface. This change
increases the robustness of the D-Bus interface to failures occurring in any
particular pool, filesystem, or block device, and decreases the computational
cost of most operations requested by the Stratis CLI. Several properties,
formerly returned as D-Bus properties, are now unavailable by means of the
D-Bus. In every case, the reason for removing the property was that it did not
represent a well-defined value. See [project issue 52] for further details.

* All D-Bus method calls are idempotent. This should make writing scripts
using the D-Bus API much simpler and make reasoning about the behavior
of the engine more straightforward. Henceforth, we will treat as a bug any
non-idempotent behavior in the D-Bus API. See [project issue 51] for further
details.

* All D-Bus size values are now returned in bytes. Again, this should make
writing scripts against the D-Bus more straightforward, since it will be
unnecessary for the script writer to change their interpretation of the number
returned on the D-Bus depending on the value that it represents. See
[stratisd issue 1243] for further details.

Please consult the D-Bus API Reference for the precise D-Bus specification.
<!-- more -->

[project issue 51]: https://github.com/stratis-storage/project/issues/51
[project issue 52]: https://github.com/stratis-storage/project/issues/52
[stratisd issue 1243]: https://github.com/stratis-storage/stratisd/issues/1243
